---
title: dotfiles
author: Brady
layout: post
permalink: /dotfiles/
---
In the last couple of days I have had this sinking feeling that something is going to happen to my MacBook.  Like, it's going to get stolen or it's going to crash.  It's completely irrational but I've taken advantage of the opportunity to do a hypothetical postmortum to determine what I would have done differently. 

I do a fairly good job of keeping important things in a safe, backed up location.  All of my code is under soure-control, I use LastPass for passwords and software license keys, and I use Google for most everything (Email, Docs, Sheets, Music, Photos) so I don't have to worry about backing up much.

However, I did realize I would be in a bit of a mess if I lost my "dotfiles".  You know, all the `.filename` files in your $HOME folder that many apps use to store your configuration.  I have haphazardly backed up some of the more important ones like `.psqlrc` (PostgresSQL) but many aren't backed up.  I also have a handful of shell scripts I've accumulated that do various things like my beloved `ws` script which starts a web server from the local directory and fires up Chrome, pointing to the URL.  If I lost this stuff, I would be sad; super sad.

Creating a [dotfiles repo](https://dotfiles.github.io/) on GitHub is something I think is a pretty great idea.  I've been meaning to do this but just kept putting it off.  The reason I like using a GitHub repo for these is because they are **versioned**, easily **sharable**, and  **restorable**.  There are lots of example repos to go off of and you can learn a lot but just looking through them.  For my purposes, I wanted something pretty simple and able to gracefully handle _secrets_.

The final result is here on GitHub: [https://github.com/bradyholt/dotfiles](https://github.com/bradyholt/dotfiles)


The repo structure is fairly flat and simple:   

~~~~~~~~
bin                 # directory containing shell scripts and other misc
                    #   executable utilities; will be symlinked from $HOME/ 

secrets             # secrets are stored here - this folder is not in the repo
                    #   but is cloned from a private Git repo during setup 

.zshrc              # dotfile will be symlinked from $HOME/
.gitconfig          # dotfile will be symlinked from $HOME/
.crontab            # crontab which will be installed during setup
[...]
dotfiles-setup.sh   # the idempotent setup script 
~~~~~~~~

 The `dotfiles-setup.sh` is where all the magic happens:
 
 1. **Initialize secrets repo** - A prompt will be given to enter the _secrets_ repo URL.  This git repo will be cloned to $DOTFILES_PATH/secrets and symlinked from $HOME/secrets.  Obviously, you'll want to use a git repo that is not publically available.  As an example for how this is used, I have a `var` file in my `secrets/` repo containing secret environmental variables.  This secret file is [loaded in my .zshrc](https://github.com/bradyholt/dotfiles/search?l=bash&q=~%2Fsecrets%2Fvar&utf8=%E2%9C%93).
 2. **symlink files from ${HOME} to $DOTFILES_PATH/** - All top level objects in $DOTFILES_PATH will be symlinked from $HOME (with exception of .git/, and dotfiles*).
 3. **symlink external config** - This is where other symlinks are created for application specific needs.  For example, [BetterSnapTool](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/bettersnaptool/id417375580?mt=12) stores its config in `${HOME}/Library/Preferences/com.hegenberg.BetterSnapTool.plist` and I have a dotfiles config located at $HOME/.BetterSnapTool (symlinked to `$DOTFILES_PATH/.BetterSnapTool` in step #2 above!).  During this step, a symlink is created: `${HOME}.  /Library/Preferences/com.hegenberg.BetterSnapTool.plist > $HOME/.BetterSnapTool`.  This step allows me to keep my dotfiles symlinked under $HOME and then do additional, one-off linking when necessary.
 4. **symlink ssh key to $HOME/secrets/id_rsa[.pub]** - Symlink my keypair to the secrets folder.  I know, Edward Snowden would be horrified.
 5. **Setup crontab** - The `.crontab` file is installed.  Unfortunately OS X 10.11 (at least) seems to have a security mechanism that prevents automatic installation of crontabs.  So, the setup script will install the crontab but then run `crontab -e` and instruct the user that a material change must be made to the crontab for it to be full installed.
 
<script src="https://gist.github.com/bradyholt/cba37ef3e10169a5accb99033794e5d6.js"></script>
